DOCSP-37056 eloquent relationships (#2747)
jenssegers/laravel-mongodb: docs/eloquent-models/relationships.txt

  created by using the ``hasMany()`` and its inverse, ``belongsTo()``
- :ref:`Many to many relationship <laravel-eloquent-relationship-many-to-many>`,
  created by using the ``belongsToMany()`` method
- :ref:`Embedded document pattern <laravel-embedded-document-pattern>`, a
  MongoDB-specific relationship that can represent a one to one or one to many
  relationship, created by using the ``embedsOne()`` or ``embedsMany()`` method
- :ref:`Cross-database relationships <laravel-relationship-cross-database>`,
  required when you want to create relationships between MongoDB and SQL models

Add a function to the model class that calls the appropriate relationship method
to establish a relationship. This function allows you to access the related
model as a **dynamic property**. A dynamic property lets you access the
related model by using the same syntax as you use to access a property on the
model.

.. _laravel-eloquent-relationship-one-to-one:

One to One Relationship
-----------------------

A one to one relationship between models consists of a model record related to
exactly one other type of model record. In MongoDB, a record is represented as

> a document, and different model types exist in separate collections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a document, and you can represent data by using different model types in separate collections.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, I think you've identified the lack of parallelism in these sentences could be confusing, so I'll rephrase to separate the unrelated info. I think this info probably belongs in the Overview section anyway.

> When you add a one to one relationship by using the method, Eloquent lets you

Reviewer: I: missing the method name S: add the name of the appropriate method
```suggestion
When you add a one to one relationship by using the <> method, Eloquent lets you
```

Author: Good catch, I removed mention of the method since that's stated in the next paragraph.

access the model by using a dynamic property and stores the model's document
ID on the related model.

In {+odm-short+}, you can define a one to one relationship by using the
``hasOne()`` method or ``belongsTo()`` method.

When you add the inverse of the relationship by using the ``belongsTo()``
method, Eloquent lets you access the model by using a dynamic property, but
does not add any fields.

To learn more about one to one relationships, see
`One to One <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/eloquent-relationships#one-to-one>`__

> in the Laravel docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the Laravel documentation.
```

Author: I initially thought of making this the standard way to refer to the Laravel site, but maybe "documentation" could be easier to translate.

One to One Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example class shows how to define a ``HasOne`` one to one
relationship between a ``Planet`` and ``Orbit`` model.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/eloquent-models/relationships/PlanetOneToOne.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:

> The following example class uses a dynamic property and calls the
> ``belongsTo()`` method to define the inverse of the relationship on ``Orbit``
> as shown in the following example class:

Reviewer: S: fix that the first clause and last clause are redundant
```suggestion
The following example class uses a dynamic property and calls the
``belongsTo()`` method to define the inverse of the relationship on ``Orbit``:
```

Author: I'll rephrase to fix some of the information that I forgot to update.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/eloquent-models/relationships/RelationshipController.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin planet orbit dynamic property example
   :end-before: end planet orbit dynamic property example

.. _laravel-eloquent-relationship-one-to-many:

One to Many Relationship
------------------------

A one to many relationship between models consists of a model that is
the parent and one or more related child model records.

When you add a one to many relationship method, Eloquent lets you access the
model by using a dynamic property and stores the parent model's document ID
on each of the child model documents.

In {+odm-short+}, you can define a one to many relationship by using the
``hasMany()`` method on the parent class and, optionally, the ``belongsTo()``
method on the child class.

When you add the inverse of the relationship by using the ``belongsTo()``
method, Eloquent lets you access the parent model by using a dynamic property
without adding any fields.

To learn more about one to many relationships, see
`One to Many <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/eloquent-relationships#one-to-many>`__

> in the Laravel docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the Laravel documentation.
```

   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin planet moons dynamic property example
   :end-before: end planet moons dynamic property example

.. _laravel-eloquent-relationship-many-to-many:

Many to Many Relationship
-------------------------

A many to many relationship consists of a relationship between two different
model types in which one type of model record can be related to multiple
records of the other type.

In {+odm-short+}, you can define a many to many relationship by adding the
``belongsToMany()`` method to both related classes.

When you define a many to many relationship in a relational database, Laravel
creates a pivot table to track the relationships. When you use {+odm-short+},
it omits the pivot table creation and adds the related document IDs to a
document field, derived from the related model class name.

.. tip::

   Since {+odm-short+} uses a document field instead of a pivot table, omit
   the pivot table parameter from the ``belongsToMany()`` constructor or set
   it to ``null``.

To learn more about many to many relationships in Laravel, see
`Many to Many <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/eloquent-relationships#many-to-many>`__

> in the Laravel docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the Laravel documentation.
```

        }
      ]

      // Documents in the "space_explorers" collection

      [
        {
          _id: ObjectId('65e1043b5265269a03078ad3'),
          name: 'Tanya Kirbuk',
          // ...
          planet_ids: [ '65e1043a5265269a03078ad0', '65e1043b5265269a03078ad2' ]
        },
        {
          _id: ObjectId('65e1043b5265269a03078ad4'),
          name: 'Mark Watney',
          // ...
          planet_ids: [ '65e1043a5265269a03078ad0', '65e1043a5265269a03078ad1' ]
        },
        {
          _id: ObjectId('65e1043b5265269a03078ad5'),
          name: 'Jean-Luc Picard',
          // ...
          planet_ids: [
            '65e1043a5265269a03078ad0',
            '65e1043a5265269a03078ad1',
            '65e1043b5265269a03078ad2'
          ]
        }
      ]

The following sample code shows how to access the related models by using
the dynamic properties as defined in the example classes.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/eloquent-models/relationships/RelationshipController.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin many-to-many dynamic property example
   :end-before: end many-to-many dynamic property example

> 

Reviewer: S: remove extra line

.. _laravel-embedded-document-pattern:

Embedded Document Pattern
-------------------------

In MongoDB, the embedded document pattern adds the related model's data into

> the parent model instead of keeping foreign key references. This pattern
> when you must optimize for one or more of the following requirements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the parent model instead of keeping foreign key references. This pattern
is useful if you must optimize for one or more of the following requirements:
```

Author: Thanks for catching the grammar issue. I think I forgot to change "This" -> "Use this". Rephrasing slightly to match the related fix.

> - Keep associated data together in a single collection
> - Perform atomic updates on multiple fields of the document and the associated
>   data
> - Reduce the number of reads required to fetch the data

Reviewer: S: based on the way the introduction to this list ends, I think you should change the format of these items
```suggestion
- You must keep associated data together in a single collection
- You must perform atomic updates on multiple fields of the document and the associated
  data
- You must reduce the number of reads required to fetch the data
```

Author: Good idea. I decided to convert the verb to a noun by using the gerund.
I think this agrees better with the list introduction.

- :ref:`Cross-database relationships <laravel-relationship-cross-database>`,
  required when you want to create relationships between MongoDB and SQL models

.. _laravel-eloquent-relationship-one-to-one:

One to One Relationship
-----------------------

A one to one relationship between models consists of a model record related to
exactly one other type of model record.

When you add a one to one relationship, Eloquent lets you access the model by
using a dynamic property and stores the model's document ID on the related
model.

In {+odm-short+}, you can define a one to one relationship by using the
``hasOne()`` method or ``belongsTo()`` method.

When you add the inverse of the relationship by using the ``belongsTo()``
method, Eloquent lets you access the model by using a dynamic property, but
does not add any fields.

To learn more about one to one relationships, see
`One to One <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/eloquent-relationships#one-to-one>`__
in the Laravel documentation.

One to One Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example class shows how to define a ``HasOne`` one to one

> relationship between a ``Planet`` and ``Orbit`` model.

Reviewer: S: this code example intro and the following one refer to different parts of the code to refer to the relationship as `HasOne` vs by the method `belongsTo()`. Perhaps standardize these to either refer to the relationship or the method that creates the relationship?

Author: Good catch, will standardize.

In {+odm-short+}, you can define a one to many relationship by using the
``hasMany()`` method on the parent class and, optionally, the ``belongsTo()``
method on the child class.

When you add the inverse of the relationship by using the ``belongsTo()``
method, Eloquent lets you access the parent model by using a dynamic property
without adding any fields.

To learn more about one to many relationships, see
`One to Many <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/eloquent-relationships#one-to-many>`__
in the Laravel documentation.

One to Many Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example class shows how to define a ``HasMany`` one to many
relationship between a ``Planet`` parent model and ``Moon`` child model.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/eloquent-models/relationships/one-to-many/Planet.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:

To define the inverse of the relationship on ``Moon``, add the dynamic
property and call the ``belongsTo()`` method on it, as shown in the following
example class:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/eloquent-models/relationships/one-to-many/Moon.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:

The following sample code shows how ton instantiate a model for each class

> and add the relationship between them.  Click the :guilabel:`View Output`

Reviewer: nit: View Output capitalization does not match the GUI `VIEW OUTPUT` 
```suggestion
and add the relationship between them.  Click the :guilabel:`View Output`
```

        name: 'Jupiter',
        diameter_km: 142984,
        // ...
      }

      // Child documents in the "moons" collection
      [
        {
          _id: ObjectId('65dfb0050e323bbef800f7b3'),
          name: 'Ganymede',
          orbital_period: 7.15,
          planet_id: '65dfb0050e323bbef800f7b2',
          // ...
        },
        {
          _id: ObjectId('65dfb0050e323bbef800f7b4'),
          name: 'Europa',
          orbital_period: 3.55,
          planet_id: '65dfb0050e323bbef800f7b2',
          // ...
        }
      ]

The following sample code shows how to access the related models by using
the dynamic properties as defined in the example classes.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/eloquent-models/relationships/RelationshipController.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin planet moons dynamic property example
   :end-before: end planet moons dynamic property example

.. _laravel-eloquent-relationship-many-to-many:

Many to Many Relationship
-------------------------

A many to many relationship consists of a relationship between two different
model types in which one type of model record can be related to multiple

> records of the other type.

Reviewer: S: clarify that this relationship applies to both models
```suggestion
records of the other type and (vice versa or something like that).
```

In {+odm-short+}, you can define a many to many relationship by adding the
``belongsToMany()`` method to both related classes.

When you define a many to many relationship in a relational database, Laravel
creates a pivot table to track the relationships. When you use {+odm-short+},
it omits the pivot table creation and adds the related document IDs to a
document field, derived from the related model class name.

.. tip::

   Since {+odm-short+} uses a document field instead of a pivot table, omit
   the pivot table parameter from the ``belongsToMany()`` constructor or set
   it to ``null``.

To learn more about many to many relationships in Laravel, see
`Many to Many <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/eloquent-relationships#many-to-many>`__
in the Laravel documentation.

> The following section shows an example of how to create a many to many
> relationship between model classes.

Reviewer: S: concision
```suggestion
The following examples demonstrates how to create a many to many
relationship between model classes.
```

Author: Thanks for pointing this out, will use the standardized version (referenced in [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/laravel-mongodb/pull/2747#discussion_r1516419165)) instead.

the parent model instead of keeping foreign key references. Use this pattern
to meet one or more of the following requirements:

- Keeping associated data together in a single collection
- Performing atomic updates on multiple fields of the document and the associated
  data
- Reducing the number of reads required to fetch the data

In {+odm-short+}, you can define embedded documents by using one of the
following dynamic property methods:

- ``embedsOne()`` to embed a single document
- ``embedsMany()`` to embed multiple documents

.. note::

   These methods return Eloquent collections, which differ from query builder
   objects.

To learn more about the MongoDB embedded document pattern, see the following
MongoDB server tutorials:

- :manual:`Model One-to-One Relationships with Embedded Documents </tutorial/model-embedded-one-to-one-relationships-between-documents/>`
- :manual:`Model One-to-Many Relationships with Embedded Documents </tutorial/model-embedded-one-to-many-relationships-between-documents/>`

The following section shows an example of how to use the embedded document
pattern.

Embedded Document Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following example class shows how to define an ``embedsMany`` one to many
> relationship between a ``SpaceShip`` and ``Cargo`` model:

Reviewer: S; related to earlier comment - decide on a convention to describe this relationship.
```suggestion
The following example class shows how to define an ``EmbedsMany`` one to many
relationship between a ``SpaceShip`` and ``Cargo`` model:
```
Or
```suggestion
The following example class shows how to use the ``embedsMany()`` method to define a one to many
relationship between a ``SpaceShip`` and ``Cargo`` model:
```

Author: Using the standardized version mentioned in [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/laravel-mongodb/pull/2747#discussion_r1516419165).
